.TH RUSH 1 "2026" "rush" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rush \- a small, bash-compatible shell written in Rust
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rush
[options]
[
.I script
[
.I "arguments ..."
] ]
.br
.B rush
.B \-c
.I command_string
[
.I command_name
[
.I "arguments ..."
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rush
is a small, bash-compatible command interpreter that reads commands from
either a script file, a
.B \-c
command string, standard input, or (interactively) a terminal, and
executes them. It covers most of the core POSIX shell language \(em
pipelines and redirection, the full set of expansions, control flow,
functions, subshells \(em plus a large slice of bash's own extensions:
indexed and associative arrays, brace expansion, extended globs,
.BR [[ " " ]]
tests, C-style arithmetic, and (on Unix) real background job control.
See
.B FEATURES
below for a summary, or the project README for the full, continuously
maintained feature matrix.
.PP
.B rush
is
.B experimental status
software: it is not yet hardened as a daily-driver login shell, and
should be treated as a project to explore and contribute to rather than
a drop-in
.BR chsh (1)
replacement.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " command_string"
Read commands from
.I command_string
instead of a script or standard input. If arguments follow
.IR command_string ,
the first becomes
.B $0
and the rest become the positional parameters.
.TP
.B \-s
Read commands from standard input, with any remaining arguments becoming
the positional parameters. Also the fallback when no script and no
.B \-c
are given but stdin isn't a terminal (e.g. piped into
.BR rush ).
.TP
.B \-i
Force interactive mode (prompting, line editing, history) even when
standard input isn't a terminal.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-login
Start as a login shell. Also implied when
.BR argv[0]
begins with a dash, matching every other POSIX shell's convention.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-restricted
Start as a restricted shell: no
.BR cd ,
no setting/unsetting
.BR PATH / SHELL / ENV / BASH_ENV ,
no command names or redirect targets containing
.BR / ,
no
.B exec
argument replacement \(em bash's own restricted-shell rule set.
.TP
.B \-n
Read and parse commands but don't execute them (a syntax-check / lint
mode) \(em also available at runtime as
.BR "set \-n" .
.TP
.B \-\-posix
Accepted for compatibility; rush's default behavior is already the POSIX
target this flag would otherwise request.
.TP
.B \-\-norc
Don't source the startup file (see
.B STARTUP FILES
below) even when running interactively.
.TP
.BI \-\-rcfile " file"
.TQ
.BI \-\-init\-file " file"
Source
.I file
instead of the default startup file when running interactively.
.TP
.BI \-O " shopt_name"
.TQ
.BI +O " shopt_name"
Enable ( \-O ) or disable ( +O ) a
.B shopt
option before executing any commands \(em the flag form of
.BR "shopt \-s/\-u shopt_name" .
.TP
.B \-\-
End option parsing; everything after this is a script name and its
arguments (or, with no script, positional parameters for a
.B \-s
stdin read).
.PP
Single-letter flags cluster the usual way
.RI ( "\-lc \(dq...\(dq"
is
.RI \-l " plus " "\-c \(dq...\(dq" ).
.SH STARTUP FILES
An interactive shell (and not disabled via
.B \-\-norc
or a
.B \-\-rcfile
override) sources
.B ~/.rushrc
if it exists. A non-interactive shell sources the file named by
.B $BASH_ENV
(after tilde and parameter expansion), if set and readable \(em the same
convention bash itself uses for non-interactive startup.
.SH FEATURES
A summary; see the README for the full, per-feature status table.
.TP
.B Expansions
Variables
.RI ( "$VAR, " "\(dq${VAR}\(dq" ),
.B ${...}
operators (default/alternate values, prefix/suffix pattern removal,
substring, case conversion, indirection, quoting/transform
.BR @Q / @E / @a / @A ),
command substitution
.RI ( "$(...), \`...\`" ),
arithmetic
.RI ( "$((...))" ),
brace expansion
.RI ( "{a,b,c}, {1..5}" ),
tilde expansion, and filename globbing (including POSIX bracket classes
and extended globs).
.TP
.B Control flow
.BR if / while / until / for / select / case ,
C-style
.BR "for ((;;))" ,
functions with recursion,
.BR "[[ ]]" " extended tests, standalone " "((expr))" .
.TP
.B Job control
.RB ( & ", Ctrl-Z, " fg / bg / jobs / wait / disown )
on Unix; a foreground-only fallback (builtins, functions, pipes,
redirects all still work) on Windows.
.TP
.B Interactive UX
A hand-rolled line editor with emacs and vi keymaps, persistent history
with bang-history recall
.RI ( "!!, !n, !$" ),
history-based autosuggestions, and context-aware tab completion.
.SH BUILTIN COMMANDS
.BR : ", " . ", " "[", " alias ", " bg ", " bind ", " break ", " builtin ,
.BR caller ", " cd ", " command ", " compgen ", " complete ", " compopt ,
.BR continue ", " declare ", " dirs ", " disown ", " echo ", " enable ,
.BR eval ", " exec ", " exit ", " export ", " false ", " fc ", " fg ,
.BR getopts ", " hash ", " help ", " history ", " jobs ", " kill ", " let ,
.BR local ", " mapfile ", " popd ", " printf ", " pushd ", " pwd ", " read ,
.BR readarray ", " readonly ", " return ", " set ", " shift ", " shopt ,
.BR source ", " suspend ", " test ", " times ", " trap ", " true ", " type ,
.BR typeset ", " ulimit ", " umask ", " unalias ", " unset ", " wait .
.br
Run
.B help
inside rush for a one-line summary of each, or
.B help builtin_name
for that builtin's own usage line.
.SH SPECIAL VARIABLES
.TP
.BR $? " " $$ " " $! " " $0 " " $# " " $@ " " $* " " $\- " " $PPID
The usual POSIX/bash special parameters: last exit status, this shell's
pid, last background job's pid, the script/shell name, positional
parameter count, all positional parameters, the current option flags,
and the parent's pid.
.TP
.BR PS1 ", " PS2 ", " PS3 ", " PS4 ", " RPS1 ", " PROMPT_COMMAND ", " PROMPT_DIRTRIM
Primary/continuation/select/xtrace prompts, the right-side prompt, a
command run before each primary prompt, and
.B $PWD
truncation depth in
.BR \ew .
.TP
.BR HISTFILE ", " HISTSIZE ", " HISTCONTROL ", " HISTIGNORE ", " HISTTIMEFORMAT
History file location and size, dedup/space-skip control, glob-based
exclusion, and per-entry timestamp formatting.
.TP
.BR IFS ", " CDPATH ", " GLOBIGNORE ", " FUNCNEST ", " TMOUT ", " BASH_ENV
Field-splitting characters,
.BR cd 's
search path, glob-exclusion patterns, function-recursion cap, idle-input
auto-logout timeout, and the non-interactive startup file.
.TP
.BR RUSH_VERSION ", " BASH_VERSION ", " BASH_VERSINFO
.B RUSH_VERSION
identifies the real shell (rush's own Cargo package version).
.B BASH_VERSION " / " BASH_VERSINFO
are a compatibility shim for scripts that gate bash-only syntax behind a
version check \(em reported as bash 5.2, the version rush's own
capability-gap tracking verifies parity against, not a claim to
.I be
bash.
.TP
.BR DIRSTACK
The
.BR pushd / popd
directory stack as a real array \(em
.B ${DIRSTACK[0]}
is always the current directory, even before any
.BR pushd .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.rushrc
Interactive startup file.
.TP
.B ~/.rush_history
Default persistent history file (override with
.BR $HISTFILE ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
Following POSIX/bash convention: the exit status of the last command
executed, 0 on success. 127 for a command not found (or dispatched to a
user-defined
.B command_not_found_handle
function, if one exists, whose own exit status is used instead). 126 for
a command found but not executable. 128+n when terminated by signal n.
.SH SEE ALSO
The rush README and
.B docs/CAPABILITY_GAPS.md
in the source repository for a full, continuously maintained
cross-shell feature comparison against dash, bash, ksh93, zsh, and fish.
.br
.BR sh (1),
.BR bash (1)
.SH BUGS
.B rush
is experimental; job control, process substitution, and coprocesses are
Unix-only. Report issues at the project's GitHub repository.
